---
last_name: Bernabé Pajares
first_name: Alberto
title: Dionysus in the Derveni Papyrus
institution: Universidad Complutense de Madrid
email: albernab@ucm.es
---

The presence of Dionysus in the Derveni Papyrus is problematic. The god is not mentioned by name, but there are some references that suggest that the commentator alludes to him or his rites. The presence in the poem of myths that would refer to the origin of Dionysus seems evident. This is the case of the passage in the commentary in which the author seems to criticise the belief in a double incest of Zeus (col. XX 13-15) or of the interpretation of a fragment of the poem (*OF* 18, col. XXV-XXVI) that refers to Zeus' desire to unite with his mother (these, as is known, are the ultimate origin of the creation of the Dionysus of the Orphics, son of Zeus and Persephone). On the other hand, possible Dionysian elements have been pointed out in the details of the ritual described in the first columns. However, although the object of the text is to comment on certain religious practices and a poem, both attributed to Orpheus by the commentator, and it is well known that Orphica are intimately related to the Dionysian realm, it is evident that the commentator goes to great lengths to minimise the presence of Dionysian myths in the poem and to reinterpret its rites. The purpose of this paper, after a brief allusion to the presence of the Dionysian in the religious context of the papyrus find, is to carry out a detailed analysis of the text in order to determine the presence of the god in three contexts: the ritual described, the poem and the commentary. Its ultimate aim is to determine the commentator's philosophical attitude towards Dionysus and the Dionysian, which may be reflected in his allusions, no less than in his silences.
