---
email: colinclarksmith@gmail.com
institution: Ohio State University (US)
keynote: false
name_first: Colin
name_last: Smith
online: false
title: "Being as πέλειν in Parmenides Fragment 8"
---
As is well known, Parmenides enacted a breakthrough in the history of philosophy by isolating and offering reflection upon the notion of being through the verb εἶναι, noun τὸ ἐόν, and their cognates in his poem. In this paper, I consider the less-discussed language of being through the verb πέλω in Fragments 6 and 8 by focusing on the occurrences of πέλειν at 6.8 and 8.18, πελέναι at 8.10 and 8.45, and πέλοι(το) at 8.19 (emended by Diels-Kranz as ἀπόλοιτο). I argue that, rather than being used arbitrarily or strictly for the sake of poetic meter, this shift in language indicates a heightened perspective regarding the nature of being achieved through the movement of the poem. After addressing being ‘nakedly’ in Fragment 2 and granting insight into its ubiquity in the subsequent Truth fragments, Parmenides’ goddess prepares us to understand being in the senses of ‘that which becomes’ and ‘that which is brought together’ that πέλειν often entails. Thus understood, the poem allows the initial insight into ‘pure being’ (εἶναι) to open onto the sense in which being entails intermixing (πέλειν) gradually and dialectically.

To motivate my reading of Parmenides, I begin with some reflection on earlier uses of πέλειν and with particular focus on its appearances in Homer (esp. Il.4.158, Il.11.392, and Od.1.225) and Sappho (esp. 101). I submit that an interesting pattern emerges: πέλειν frequently acts as what I call an “enhanced copula,” entailing a strong emphasis on the intermixedness of subject and predicate terms. This meaning, furthermore, is built into the secondary sense of πέλω as ‘to stir’ when used in compounds. Such senses give context to Parmenides’ first use of πέλειν at 6.8, where the narrating goddess contrasts it with οὐκ εἶναι and criticizes mortals for mixing together these two notions by taking them to be “the same and not the same.” This entails criticism of the mortal tendency to misapprehend, or otherwise miss, the fundamental rootedness of the beings in being itself.

Thereafter, πέλειν functions in Fragment 8 in tandem with the turn from being itself (εἶναι) to that which has being (τὸ ἐόν) to guide the reader’s thinking toward the goddess’s insights into being. After considering appearances at 8.10, 8.18, and 8.19, I submit that the claim that being “must not be any larger or any smaller here or there” (in which we find the use of πέλειν at 8.44-45) indicates being’s sublation into a spatiotemporalized sense that nevertheless preserves the initial insight into the a-spatial and omnitemporal notion of being itself at issue earlier in Truth. This prepares the reader for the turn away from the fundamental notion of being and toward the spatiotemporal beings themselves, or the turn from Truth to Doxa, inaugurated at 8.51-52.
