---
email: david.sider@nyu.edu
institution: New York University
keynote: false
name_first: David
name_last: Sider
online: false
title: 'The Proem: Sources, Language, and Purpose'
---
I shall present a case for several new ways of looking at the Proem. Source(s): To begin, the first line of B 1 did not begin the poem; i.e., Sextus’ ἐναρχόμενος does not mean “at the very beginning,” i.e., the first line.” Rather, as a brief review of the use of this verb in Sextus’ time readily shows, it more usually means “towards the beginning.” Note Philo (a century before Sextus), who uses the very form ἐναρχόμενος when citing Genesis 1.27, i.e., 27 sentences into the text. There is thus no need to wonder at, decry, or attempt to justify the Proem’s supposed abrupt beginning. Sextus’ passage, which evidence from Simplicius shows to be a seamless join of at least three originally separate passages of the original poem. I shall further argue that his source was Hippias of Elis’ Synagoge, the most likely person to have abridged silently, unlike what is found in other ancient collections, and that Hippias included more than Sextus cites.

Language: I shall argue that Parmenides in the proem’s two minor ecphrases, that of the chariot and that of the gates, he intentionally offers confusions of various sorts between two objects each concerned with homologous parts that move in circular paths, some of which are also homonymous or nearly so; i.e., three words appear in each but with different senses: ἄξων (both axle and door-pivot), σύριγξ (both axle-shaft [NB: not a musical instrument] and pivot-shaft), and αἰθ- (both hot/gleaming and heavenly). And yet no ancient auditor or reader was confused. This subtly prepares Parmenides’ auditors for a defense of mortal language, which may fall short of the truth, but is still adequate for communication. I shall also say more about the place of motion in the proem. The journey and its destination: The chariot travels west along the ground (no Himmelfarht) and arrives at the liminal spot (marked by an actual limen, οὐδός, B 1.12) where earth meets sky and, more significantly, night meets day; which is also where (and not some distance past the gates) he will learn about night and light, the two basic components of the world of seeming. Thus, Parmenides’ journey is neither a katabasis or an ascension. Parmenides’ audience: I will also try to show how the proem’s apparent confusion of tenses provides evidence that the poem was originally designed for oral presentation, an argument that will also support the reading πάντ᾿ ἄστη (or, more likely, the epic form ἄστεα) on line 3.
