---
session:
  id: 17
email: jianglu5@mail.sysu.edu.cn
institution: Sun Yat-sen University
keynote: false
name_first: Lu
name_last: Jiang
online: true
title: Persuasion, Necessity and Truth in Parmenides’ Fragments
---
In the early beginnings of the Greek philosophy, philosophical concepts were mingled with mythology. Persuasion (*peithô*), Necessity (*anankê*) and Truth (*alêtheia*) which became central concepts of Greek philosophy of the following centuries were all to be found as names of goddesses in Hesiod's *Theogony*. Research on Parmenides's relationship with Hesiod and the Orphic tradition is abundant. But Parmenides uses these words both as mythological names and philosophical concepts, in case of persuasion, he uses it both in its nominative form and in its verbal form *peíthô*. Persuasion is strongly interconnected with truth, as we can read in Fragment 2, 4. The path of Persuasion is the path "that is and that cannot not be" (in Gallop's translation), the description of the path of Persuasion as well as that is or Being is a modal one, however the phrase originally used by Parmenides in 2,3 is constructed upon the verb "*estin*" as "*ouk esti mê einai*), only two lines later in 2,5, while describing the other path of that is not a genuinely modal verb "*chreô*" is used. The modal description of being is even more obvious in Fragment 8,30, where it is said that Necessity holds what-is (*eon*) "fast in the chains of a limit". As John Palmer points out, this description "pick out the mode of necessary being" (2009: 97-8). But what is the relationship between Persuasion and Necessity? Palmer summarizes the entire fragment 8 in which the attributes of being are enumerated as "the way of conviction (his translation for *peithô*). Robert Wardy suggests that this account of being attempts to "fuse reality with persuasive truth by way of rational compulsion" (1996: 12). In this interpretation, ontological necessity is made clear by logical arguments. But why does the truth need to be persuasive? As in fragment 1, in the proem, Daughters of the Sun had to persuade the goddess Justice (*Dikê*) to open the gate leading to the goddess of the Night (according to Palmers interpretation of the unnamed *thea* in 1,22), who gives Parmenides the account of the way of Truth. Persuasion is not just merely logical, it has to be dialogical. However, as persuasion has the strength of necessity, it is not rhetorical, as understood later by the sophists. In Parmenides fragments, the first act of persuasion is directed at a goddess who represents a cosmic force (Gargarin 1974: 195). Therefore, it seems that Parmenides attempts to find a proper and almost divine way of expressing what reality is. Reality itself is ontologically necessary, and an adequate account of it must be of the persuasive necessity which will be accepted by divine authority. A proper persuasion in Parmenides in not directed at mortals but at gods who will be able to judge the adequacy of the philosopher's account, and I shall argue with more elaboration that this interpretation fairs well with the mythological outset of Parmenides's whole poem *On Nature*.
