---
last_name: Peixoto
first_name: Miriam Campolina Diniz
title: The plurivocity and centrality of the notion of measure in the framework of Democritus' ethical reflection
institution: Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais
email: mpeixoto@ufmg.br
---
It is not difficult to recognize the centrality and omnipresence of the notion of measure within the framework of the fragments and testimonies of Democritus of Abdera. By examining these texts, it is possible to reconstruct in broad outline the horizon of his reflections on ethical issues. 
The measure, and the calculation from which each individual establishes the measure for himself and for each circumstance, thus constitutes a key piece in the characterization of human actions and attitudes that lead to what, according to Diógenes Laércio, constituted the end of life human, this is good cheer (Τέλος δ᾿ εἶναι τὴν εὐθυμίαν) (DK68A1.45). When it comes to establishing the conditions that contribute to achieving this objective, it is possible to count on a significant number of texts from which to extract material to achieve this purpose. We have testimonies and fragments that attribute to the soul a whole series of operations of a noetic nature, among which are those expressed by verbs such as φρονεῖν, λογίζεσθαι and βούλεσθαι, and by other terms such as φρόνησις and λογισμός. And, to indicate what happens to humans as a consequence of these operations, we have, in the first instance, a series of terms pertinent to the lexical field of the notion of measurement, such as those formed from the radical μέτρ- (μετρεῖν, μέτριος, μετριότης, σύμμετρος, συμμετρία),those that express the idea of "temperance" or "moderation" in the execution of actions, in the satisfaction of desires and needs, in the conformation of attitudes and behaviors (σωφρονεῖν, σωφροσύνη), in addition to a significant number of terms formed with the addition of the adverb εὖ to express the character of knowledge, attitudes and actions. In my paper, I will present an examination of the measurement vocabulary, from which I attempt to show the nuances and convergences that serve to affirm the internal coherence of the set of Abderita fragments, as well as the connection between physics and ethics. To this end, I will examine the fragments recorded by Estobeu in his anthologies, the sentences that were transmitted to us under the name "Democrates" and other collections of sentences that constitute the Gnomica Democritea present in the Corpus Parasinum and in some authors listed in the Patrologia Migne.

