---
session:
  id: 10
  order: 1
last_name: Volf
first_name: Marina
title: Intentional and epistemic arguments in Gorgias' *On non being*
institution: Institute of Philosophy and Law of Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Science
email: rina.volf@gmail.com
---

My paper is about the question of the philosophic nature of two versions of Gorgias' treatise *On non being* – the skeptical version of Sextus Empiricus (AM 65-87) and the peripatetic version of the Anonymous (*MXG* V–VI. 979a11-980b21).
I suggest to correlate the epistemic sections of these paraphrases and outline the philosophical problems that are either implicitly contained in the arguments of Gorgias, or introduced into the text by the narrator or, in some cases, by the translator. Gorgias drew attention to serious epistemological problems, and his paraphrasers were able to recognize and interpret them from within the philosophical context relevant to each of them. This testifies to the equal philosophical status of both retellings: it is impossible to say that one of them is more rhetorical and the other – more philosophical, and that Gorgias himself is a nihilist or a builder of tricky and unfunny jokes, but, on the contrary, he is an ambitious philosopher, whose contribution to ancient epistemology cannot be ignored.

Justifying my standpoint, I offer a comparative examination of the arguments that the informants adhere to when expressing the thoughts of Gorgias, and I demonstrate the philosophical problems discussed by Gorgias, based on both *MXG* and *AM*, trying to take into account how both versions complement and clarify each other in terms of presenting epistemic issues.
I also intend to show how Gorgias modernizes and transforms the original views of Parmenides. Parmenides discusses how thought can be intended to an existing object and what the properties of such an object may be due to the intentionality of thinking. Gorgias, in turn, raises the question not only of noetic certainty, but of the cognition of any mental object, including the question of how thought can be directed to the non-being. I believe that B 16 DK interpreted in terms of ancient theory of pores can serve as a starting point for understanding of Gorgias’ attitude. From this fragment it is possible to trace how Parmenides' view shifts from thought to any kind of comprehension and back, and how he makes thought (and comprehension in the broad sense) in *Doxa* dependent on the state of the body (senses). Perhaps this passage allows Gorgias to shift his epistemic focus from "being" to "non-being".

Gorgias discovers a number of significant epistemological consequences focusing on "non-being". Among them there are the issue of intentionality, the question of privileged status to any of a mental states, the nature of the word, the problem of the essence of words and language as an autonomous ways of knowing external essences, the problem of meaning as a references, the issue of intersubjectivity in cognition.
Of these listed epistemological consequences, some of them are discussed only in *MXG*, and some are only in *AM* (we do not take into account the mentions, but only a detailed retelling). At the same time, both narrators retain the general structure of the epistemic section of speech, which has a complicated structure at each step: first, Gorgias discusses how cognition in general relates to being or non being (the intentional argument), regardless of whether the cognizable object relates to any real state of affairs; at the next step he distinguishes among the cognizing “state of the body” and noetic abilities, wondering about the privileged status of each of them (the epistemic argument) (in this case I am using the terminology of V. Caston). Finally, Gorgias puts them in dependence on the cognizing subject, or on the nature of the thing itself to be known. The last point depends on what kind of retelling – skeptical or peripatetic – we have to deal with.
