---
last_name: Salles
first_name: Ricardo
title: Meteorology and basic substances in Anaximander
institution: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
email: rsalles@unam.mx
---
This paper deals with the meteorology of Anaximander and argues that, in his theory, the drying up of the sea cannot be accounted for in terms of the kind of conflict envisaged in his main fragment between the four basic substances: the hot, the cold, the wet and the dry (*DK* 12A9 and B1). In so doing, the paper takes issue with a classic interpretation of Anaximander’s cosmology advocated by Jaap Mansfeld (‘Anaximander’s fragment: another attempt’, *Phronesis* 56 \[2011\]: 1-32). This issue also reveals a wider philosophical problem: are meteorological phenomena in general amenable to this conflict according to Anaximander? In the conclusion, a few conjectural remarks are made regarding what may have been the real explanandum of this theory. Mansfeld’s interpretation is based on two disputable assumptions: (i) Anaximander advocates a four-elements theory in which natural substances, including the Sun and the sea, are constituted by fire, air, water and earth, and (ii) there is for Anaximander a one-to-one correspondence between each of these elements and one of the four basic substances, so that fire is hot, air is cold, water is wet and earth is dry. One could question Mansfeld’s overall interpretation by discussing just these two assumptions. But my target in this paper is much more specific. Assuming for the sake of argument that both (i) and (ii) are correct, and conceding that the desiccation of the sea is indeed an action of the hot on the wet (where the Sun represents the hot identified with fire, and the sea represents the wet identified with water), it still does not follow that we can explain the desiccation of the sea in terms of the conflict that Anaximander describes in his main fragment.
