---
last_name: Milione
first_name: Vitor de Simoni
title: "The Presocratics’ reception in Xenophon’s *Memorabilia*: Socrates’ critical approach to cosmology"
institution: Université de Montréal
email: vitormilione@gmail.com
---

The main goal of my paper is to analyze Socrates’ views on Presocratic cosmology outlined in *Memorabilia*. My starting point will be Memorabilia 1.1.11-15, where Xenophon defends Socrates against the accusation of impiety. The second key text that must be considered is *Memorabilia* 4.7.5-7, in which Socrates expresses his suspicions towards astronomy as well as a harsh critique of Anaxagoras’ speculations. A close analysis of both texts raises two overarching questions: Why does Xenophon intertwine Presocratic cosmology with Socrates' conception of the divine? What motivates Socrates' rigorous condemnation of both Presocratic cosmology and astronomical inquiry?

Indeed, all those questions touch upon some key notions of Xenophon’s own philosophy, which must be taken into account. Firstly, I contend that Xenophon's endeavor to disassociate Socrates from his philosophical predecessors, particularly Anaxagoras, is grounded in apologetic reasons, a pattern observed in his treatment of other controversial figures like Critias and Alcibiades. Hence, Xeno\-phon presents Socrates as a stern critic of impious (and atheistic) speculations revolving around the nature and the cosmos. Secondly, I argue that the contrast between, on the one hand, Socrates’ general views on Presocratic cosmology and, on the other hand, his own conception of the cosmos derives from a deeper dichotomy between the notions of divine wisdom and human wisdom (*anthropine sophia*). This contrast serves as a foundational principle shaping Socrates' philosophical orientation. Thirdly, I argue that Socrates' disinterest in and critique of Presocratic cosmology are closely linked to the notion of “utility” (*opheleia*) but also to his own conception of *paideia*. This highlights the pragmatic underpinning of Socrates' philosophical inquiries and his emphasis on practical knowledge. In other words, since Socratic education seeks to cultivate *kaloi kagathoi* by providing them with all the necessary skills to properly govern and manage the city, the acquisition of knowledge is oriented towards its application in the private and the public spheres, for one’s own benefit and that of one’s fellow citizens. From this perspective, purely theoretical inquiries on cosmology and *astronomia* have no place in the proper education of a *kalos kagathos*.

By traversing this analytical trajectory, I aim to underscore Xenophon's portrayal of a significant gulf between the speculative endeavors of the Presocratics and Socrates' own philosophical task. This juxtaposition places Socrates as a pivotal figure in the history of philosophy, accentuating his distinctive contribution to the Western intellectual landscape.
